A Prayer to the Svayambhū Stūpa1 in Nepal
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

emaho
Emaho!
rang jung chö küi chö dong chen po ni
This great spontaneously arisen stūpa of the dharmakāya,
gyalwa nam kyi tuk kyi chinlap shing
Infused with the blessings of the buddhas’ wisdom minds,
dorjei zom shyé drakpa chen po der
To this place, renowned as the “Vajra Peak”,2
ngo tsar sam mi khyap la solwa dep
So wondrous as to defy the imagination, I pray!

shanta puri drong khyer sa chö shying
In the earthly town of Śāntipur
he ru ka yi trulpé kyilkhor shyuk
Lies the emanated maṇḍala of the Heruka,
pakpa shing kün zuk küi chö dong ché
The great rūpakāya stūpa of Svayambhū,
go ma sa la gendhar solwa dep
To the Gomasālagandha,3 I pray!

dü sum gyalwa nam kyi shyap chak ching
The Buddhas of past, present and future all set foot here,
ngön jön sangye rab dün ring sel gyi
And it's filled with the jewel-like relics of the buddhas of the seven ages—
norbü chur bur tampé chö dong ché
To this great stūpa, in devotion,
gü pé chak chö taktu solwa dep
I pay homage and offer constant prayer!

dik shak yi rang chö khor korwar kül
I confess my harmful actions, rejoice in virtue, request the turning of the Dharma wheel,
shyuk sol dep shing gé tsok dro la ngo
Implore the buddhas to remain, and dedicate my merits to living beings—
ku sum go pang dampa ngön ché shok
May they all arrive at the sublime attainment of the three kāyas!
ten chok di yi dzam bü ling kün dé
Through the power of this supreme representation, may happiness reign throughout the whole world,
kün khyen tubpé tenpa dar shying gyé
May the teachings of the Omniscient Buddha flourish and spread,
ten la nöpa tadak shyiwa dang
May all harm to the teachings be pacified,
pendéi getsen gyepé tashi shok
And may all be auspicious for positive signs of benefit and happiness to spread far and wide!

The one called Chökyi Lodrö made this aspiration in the presence of the sacred stūpa itself.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2008, revised 2015 & 2016 (with many thanks to Hubert Decleer
for his comments and corrections).

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "bal yul mchod sdong 'phags pa shing kun gyi gsol 'debs/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012.
W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 385
↑ The Tibetan title refers to the stūpa as Pakpa shingkun ('phags pa shing kun). On this, see
Hubert Decleer, “The Tibetan Name of Svayambhu, 'Phags pa shing kun ('Sacred All-Trees'):
What Does it Really Mean?” in Light of the Valley: Renewing the Sacred Art and Traditions
of Svayambhu, edited by Tsering Palmo Gellek & Padma Dorje Maitland. Cazadero, CA: Dharma
Publishing, pp. 241–72. ↑ Even though the Tibetan has zam (“bridge”) here, this must be
corrected to zom, to give “Vajra Peak” (rdo rje'i zom), one of the four names of Svayambhū,
which changed with each yuga/aeon (Hubert Decleer)↑ Although the editor of the Tibetan text
has mistakenly written “gan dho” rather than “gan dha” here, this is not speaking of a
gandhola, but is a reference to one of the names of Svayambū, according to the Li yul prophecy
(Hubert Decleer).