A Prayer to the Stūpa of Jarung Khashor in Boudha
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

namo guru
Namo guru!
gyalwa nam kyi tuk chok chö kyi ku
This great stūpa symbolizing the dharmakāya,
tsönpar jepé chö dong chenpo ni
The sublime wisdom mind of all the buddhas,
sishyi kham na nyima tar lham mé
Shines bright like the sun throughout all the realms of existence and quiescence—
tongdrol chenpo dé la solwa deb
‘Great Liberation Upon Seeing’, to you I pray!

sangye ong sung chenpö ringsel gyi
Precious reliquary piled high with sacred relics,
chur bur tampé kudung rinpoche
Such as the ringsel of the buddha Mahākāśyapa,
khandro demchok tukkyé lé trünpé
Which arose from the noble aspirations of the ḍākinī Samvarī—
ten chok yishyin norbur solwa deb
Supreme representation ‘Wish-Fulfilling Jewel’, to you I pray!

khen lob chögyal nam kyi jangchok su
The Abbot, the Precious Master and the Dharma King
tubten pelwé yardam semkyé shyé
Made their aspirations here to spread the Buddha’s teachings to the North—
lhami nam kyi sönam sakpé shying
To this field for the accumulation of merit among gods and human beings,
tsungda mé la güpé chaktsal shying
I prostrate in devotion!
chö dang dikshak gé la jé yi rang
Before you, I make offerings, I confess my misdeeds and I rejoice in virtue;
chö kul nyangen mi da soltab dang
I implore the masters to teach and to remain without passing into parinirvāṇa;
gé tsok namkhé tartuk dro la ngo
And I dedicate all my merits to the infinity of beings throughout the vast reaches of the universe.

sangye ten dar tendzin shyabpé ten
May the Buddhadharma flourish and may the lives of its holders remain secure!
dü truk shyi shying dé gé pal yön gyé
May the turmoil of this age be pacified and may the splendours of happiness and virtue increase!
drelpé düpé shin sön pomo nam
May everyone—male and female, living or dead—who has any connection with you
lamé changchub chok la nyur gö shok
Be brought swiftly to supreme and unsurpassable awakening!

This aspiration was made by Chökyi Lodrö in the presence of the sacred stūpa itself.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2005

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "mchod rten bya rung kha shor gyi gsol 'debs/" in ’Jam
dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 10: 387