A Prayer to the Three Stūpas of Nepal
by Jamyang Khyentsé Chökyi Lodrö

emaho dü sum sangye nam kyi jin gyi lab
Emaho! The blessings of the buddhas of the three times,
trulpé ringsel dzepa mepé ter
An inexhaustible treasury of miraculous relics,
chökü chörten pakpa shing kün la
The dharmakāya stūpa of Svayambhūnāth1—
miché güpa chenpö solwa deb
With unshakable devotion, to you I pray!

sangye ösung chok gi jinlab lé
Through the sublime blessings of the Buddha Kāśyapa,
khandro demchok sé dang chepa yi
The ḍākinī Samvarī and her sons,
lekpar shyengpé chö dong chenpo ni
Built this great stūpa to perfection—
pakpaja rung khashor la solwa deb
Noble Jarung Khashor, to you I pray!

changchub sempa nyingtob chenpo yi
From the relic remains of bodhisattva Mahāsattva,2
takmor jinpé kudung lhakma lé
Who offered his body to the tigress,
trünpé sönam shying chok chörten la
Arose this stūpa, a supreme field of merit3—
depé chaktsal güpé solwa deb
To you, with confidence I prostrate and with devotion I pray!

lü dang longchö dü sum gé tsok ché
My body, my possessions and all the virtue I gather throughout the three times,
kunzang chöpé trin du bulwa dang
All of them, I offer, as Samantabhadra’s offering clouds!
chaktsal dikshak yi rang chö kul shying
I prostrate, confess my misdeeds, rejoice, and request the Dharma and pray that you remain—
shyuk sol gé tsok changchub chenpor ngo
Through this accumulation of merit, may we attain the great awakening!

dakshyen kyé dang tserab tamché du
May I and others, throughout all our lives,
ngön tö ten tob ngejung tsultrim dang
Attain a rebirth in a higher realm! May renunciation, discipline,
jam dang nyingjé changchub sem chok dang
Love, compassion, supreme bodhicitta,
yangdak tawa gyü la kyewar shok
And the authentic view awaken in our minds!

sangye tenpa dar shying gyepa dang
May the Buddha’s teachings spread far and wide!
dro nam dekyi pel shying gyüpa sel
May beings’ happiness and joy increase and their misery be dispelled!
ten la nöpa tamché rabshyi shying
May all harm to the teachings be completely pacified!
tendzin kyé nam shyabpé ten gyur chik
And may the lives of the holders of the teachings be ever secure and stable!

This was written by Chökyi Lodrö in front of the Boudha Stūpa, Jarung Khashor.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2017. (Translated by Peter Woods and Stefan Mang. Revised 2018,
with many thanks to Hubert Decleer.)

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "ne+e pa la'i mchod rten rnam gsum gyi gsol 'debs/"
in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 10: 391–392
↑ The Tibetans refer to Svayambhū as Pakpa Shingkün ('phags pa shing kun), Sacred All-Trees.
On this, see Hubert Decleer, “The Tibetan Name of Svayambhu, 'Phags pa shing kun ('Sacred
All-Trees'): What Does it Really Mean?” in Light of the Valley: Renewing the Sacred Art and
Traditions of Svayambhu, edited by Tsering Palmo Gellek & Padma Dorje Maitland (Cazadero,
CA: Dharma Publishing, 2002): 241–272.↑ In his life prior to attaining awakening, Buddha
Śākyamuni was the bodhisattva Mahāsattva, ‘the Courageous,’ who offered his body to a hungry
tigress.↑ i.e. the stūpa of Namo Buddha