An Aspiration to Travel to the Hidden Land of Pemokö
by Lelung Jedrung Zhepai Dorje

tsa sum kündü pema tö treng tsal
Embodiment of the Three Roots, Pema Tötrengtsal,
pawo khandrö tsok dang chepa nam
Together with the gatherings of heroes and ḍākinīs,
dak gi mönpa drubpé pangpo ru
Come here unimpededly and remain
tokmé shek la dir shyuk gong su sol
Witnessing me as I make this aspiration, I pray.

dakshyen kyé pak kün kyi dü sum du
Through whatever collections of virtue I and others, all ordinary beings and noble ones,
sakpé gé tsok jinyé gyipa dang
Accumulate throughout the three times,
rigdzin khandrö tukkyé den tob kyi
And the power of the truth of the bodhicitta resolve of vidyādharas and ḍākinīs,
mönpé dön di tokmé nyur drub shok
May the aim of this aspiration be quickly accomplished without impediment!

gangchen kyegü sönam shying chok tu
In this supreme meritorious realm of the people of the snow mountains,
pemé jin lab bé né kün kyi chok
Supreme among all the hidden lands blessed by Padmasambhava is
khachö nyipa pemo kö di yi
This second Khecara, Pemokö—
ngotsar nangwa ten la pebpar shok
May we see its wondrous marvel in actuality!

jung shyi yang chü nö kyi gé chu gyé
In the environment of the essential wealth of the four elements, the ten virtues increase, and
lo lek kya gyal dögu ngang gi du
The grain of a good harvest and everything one could desire naturally come together.
né yam truktsö dü kyi chepa kün
Even the names of the calamities of contagious disease, strife, and war are not heard—
ming yang mi drak taktu shipar shok
May there be this constant auspiciousness!

lalo migö chenzen bu drang sok
Barbarians, savages, carnivorous wild beasts and insects and the like,
chu der chewachen kyi duktsub dang
With their menacing claws, fangs, and beaks, as well as
né sung dé gyé khandrö chotrul sok
The sorcerous tricks of the local guardians, the eight classes of spirits, and the ḍākinīs—
zukmé tsub mé barché shyiwar shok
May all unseen disruptive obstacles be pacified!

trang bur shu tor tsé né kang bam dang
May swollen protrusions, abscesses, inflammatory diseases, elephantiasis,
mu chu drangwa chuser lasokpé
Edema, cold natured illnesses, lymphatic disorders, and all such illnesses
jung shyi né dang duk lang gyünché ching
Of the four elements and infectious vapors,
dönnyer chen kün gekmé dröpar shok
Be eliminated and all who possess ardour travel without obstruction!

gangchen bö kyi kalden kün du shying
May the fortunate ones of snowy Tibet come together
shedrub tubten nyingpo darwa dang
And spread the essential teachings of theory and practice,
khyepar dorjé tekpé nyurlam lé
Particularly, by the swift path of the Vajrayāna,
bé né drubtob po mö gangwar shok
May the hidden land be filled with male and female accomplished ones.

gangshyik né dir dröpa tsam gyi mö
Whoever merely aspires to reach this place—
dikdrib nyetung drimé tsok dak né
Their accumulated stains of misdeeds, obscurations, faults, and downfalls will be purified,
nyam dang tokpa ngang gyi barwa dang
And by the natural blazing of experience and realisation,
tsa lung tiklé min ching drolwar shok
May the channels, winds, and essences ripen and be liberated!

né di gojé shyepé dorjé dang
May the intentions of the ones who opened this hidden land, Zhepai Dorje and
gyalyum lha chik dorjé kyab jé kyi
The mother of the victorious ones Lhachik Dorjé Kyabjé,1
tuk kyi shyepa jishyin drubpa dang
Be accomplished just as they were made.
kalpa gyatsö bardu shyabten shok
May they both live for an ocean of eons!

sang chok khandro gyatsö lungtenpé
Those prophesied by the vast multitudes of supremely secret ḍākinīs,
na dren pawo pal gyal jebang kün
The guide, the heroes, the glorious king, the lord and his subjects,
nekab ngön tö lektsok kün gyé shing
For the time being, may all excellent things of the higher realms increase for them, and
tartuk pema ö du drolwar shok
May they ultimately be liberated in the [Palace of] Lotus Light!

khandro gyatsö taktu drok dzé ching
May the hosts of ḍākinīs always offer companionship,
damchen sungmé trinlé drubpa dang
The oath-bound protectors accomplish their enlightened activities, and
jitar tsipé lé kyi jawa kün
Every deed and action, just as they have been divined,
ten drö dön chen khonar gyurwar shok
Result only in great benefit for the teachings and beings!

né di chok su ngalwa tenpa kün
May all the weary ones who strive to reach this place
taktu lama khandrö jezung té
Always be watched over and accepted by the guru and ḍākinīs, and
tukjé jinlab nying la jukpa dang
The blessing of compassion enter into their hearts,
di chi dön nam ngang gi drubpar shok
So they naturally accomplish the benefit of this life and the next!

trulpé né di tendrel drikpé tü
May all the invading enemies of snowy Tibet be averted
gangchen bö kyi tamak kün dok ching
By the power of the auspicious interdependence of this emanating place, and
kyegu tamché bö shying kyipa dang
May all the beings of the land of Tibet be happy, and
tubpé tenpa dar shying gyepar shok
The doctrine of the Buddha flourish and spread!

ngensong sum gyi dukngal kün ché ching
May all the suffering of the three lower realms cease, and
kham sum womin shying du jongpa dang
The three realms attain the perfection of Akaniṣṭha!
jisi namkha zepar magyurwar
May the ornamented wheels of the three secrets blaze
sang sum gyen gyi khorlo barwar shok
For as long as space remains!

Thus, the great householder Pelgyel2 of the supremely heroic Orshö Orang family requested Zhepai
Dorje on behalf of the monks of the Padma Ö Ling retreat center in the sacred place of
Nang Ding, which is the aspect of the throat chakra of enjoyment in the great hidden land
of Pemakö, for an essential [prayer] that would be suitable for regular use. Accordingly,
in the quaint residence of Pema Yangdong Dorje on the virtuous day of the first half of
the Monkey month in the Female Water Ox Year (1733) called Incautious,3 the vidyādhara Zhepai
Dorje clearly dictated [this prayer] to the scribe Dorje Sangdak.

| Translated by Tom Greensmith, Tenzin Choephel and Ryan Jacobson, 2020.

Source: Sle lung rJe drung bZhad pa'i rdo rje. 1982. “sBas yul pad+mo bkod du bgrod pa'i smon
lam”. In. gSung 'bum/ bZhad pa'i rdo rje, vol.7. pp. 515-520. 大谷大学图书馆. 京都市. (W1CZ2744).

Version: 1.1-20210825
↑ Lha gcig rdo rje skyabs byed, BDRC P2CN4771↑ Personal communication from Franz-Karl Ehrhard
(2018). The Orshö Orang ('or shod o rang) were landed nobility in eastern Kongpo and important
benefactors (sbyin bdag), specifically to Chöje Lingpa (1682–1720).↑ The term for the
female Water Ox is bag med (pramādin), meaning 'incautious'. In some manuscripts, as here,
this is occasionally transformed into the more-positive sounding bag yod, i.e., the Cautious.