Gathering Auspiciousness
A Prayer of Aspiration Made in the Presence of the Sacred Mahābodhi Temple and its Imagery,
Magadha, Land of the Āryas
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Namo bhagavate śākyamunaye!
tob chü wangchuk kunkhyen zé tsang sé
Master of the ten powers, all-knowing son of Śuddhodana,
gyalwa kun gyi ü na pé kar tar
You who are praised as a white lotus among the victorious ones,
rab ngak lha mi lama kang nyi tso
Foremost of the two-legged, such as gods and human beings,
tubwang nyima chok la chak tsal lo
Supreme sun, lord of sages, to you I pay homage!

chok zung té rab dün dang neten ché
With the roar of a fearless lion, amidst the inconceivable assembly
nyentö rang gyel chang sem khor gyi tsok
That includes the supreme pair,1 seven patriarchs2 and great elders,3
samyé ü na jikmé sengé dré
Śrāvakas, pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas,
tsang yang chö dra drok la chak tsal lo
You proclaim the Dharma in the divine voice of Brahmā—to you I pay homage!

rabjam shying kun ku yi köpé khyab
Your forms are present throughout infinite realms,
dé shyin shekpé tsok dang ka drö shing
Where they converse with hosts of thus-gone buddhas,
dülwa nam shyi chotrul pa ta yé
And display infinite miracles as they tame in the four ways—4
shakya sengé shyab la chak tsal lo
Lion of the Śākyas, to you I pay homage!

chang chub dampa ngön du nyepé né
At this site where you attained perfect awakening,
dorje den gyi jikmé sengé tri
Upon the fearless lion’s throne, the Vajra Seat,
chang chub jönpé shing gi dzepa der
In the shade of the beautiful bodhi tree,
tubwang dön kün drup la chak tsal lo
Siddhārtha, Lord of Sages, to you I pay homage!

gang gi namtar kha dang gyatsö jing
Your liberation, which is as vast as space or an ocean,
pakpé lö kyang shyal ké né gyur na
Would be difficult even for the mind of an Ārya to fathom,
chi lö tra tsé torwé ngalwé chi
So why exhaust oneself with the smatterings of an undeveloped mind?
ön kyang cha shé depé töpé tü
Yet, through devoted praise based on partial comprehension,
dak sok di zung kyewa tamché du
May I and others in this and all our future lives,
yong dzin shenyen dampar trepa dang
Encounter noble spiritual guides and teachers,
kün khyen tubpa chenpö jé zung né
Be accepted by the great all-knowing Sage,
tek chok dampé chö la chöpar shok
And savour the noble Dharma of the supreme vehicle!

nam shyik gyaltsab mapam gönpo yi
In future, when the invincible Lord Maitreya
bendza sanar chökhor korwé dü
Turns the wheel of dharma at the Vajra Seat,
khor gyi tokmar lungten uk yung tob
May we attain a prophecy in the very first assembly,
chang chub chöpa gyatso tarchin shok
And perfect an ocean of enlightened conduct!

dal jor ten tob tsultrim pungpo dzok
May we always enjoy a free, well-favoured human form and maintain perfect ethical discipline,
dewar shekpé chö dzö rab dzin té
And may we master the treasury of the bliss-gone buddhas’ Dharma.
dorje den gyi po la ngön tsang gya
Having become fully awakened upon the vajra seat,
namkha nyampé dro nam drolwar shok
May we liberate beings, who are as innumerable as space is vast!

né dir dé mö drelwé düpa yi
May the foremost of those gathered here through ties of faith and devotion,
tso ché ma gyur rik druk semchen nam
Beings of the six classes, my very own past mothers,
khorwa ngen song dukngal lé drol té
Be freed from the sufferings of saṃsāra and the lower realms,
dé den shying du dzü té kyewar shok
And take miraculous birth in the blissful realm of Sukhāvatī!

tendzin kyé nam ku tsé jön zang ten
May all be auspicious, so that the lives of the teachers remain firmly rooted,
tenpé jindak u mok rabtu tsen
Dharma patrons enjoy prestigious status and perfect wealth,
gendün düpa litri chu ter gyé
Saṅgha communities flourish and expand like a vermilion sea,
gyal ten dar shying gyṕé trashi shok
And the teachings of the victorious one spread far and wide!

Jamyang Chökyi Lodrö spoke these words before the Mahābodhi temple in Bodhgayā on the 30th day
of the 11th month of the Fire Bird year (1957/8) in response to a request from his own
student, Yakzewa Gyurme Drakpa, who offered an auspicious silken scarf, silver coins and a
jewel-shaped stone. The secretary Tsering Tashi then respectfully wrote what was said.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation, 2018.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "'phags yul ma gad+ha'i byang chub chen po'i bzhugs
gnas rten dang brten par bcas pa'i gsol smon/" in ’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung
’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986 Vol. 10: 349–351
↑ Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana↑ Mahākāśyapa, Ānanda, Śāṇavāsika, Upagupta, Dhītika, Kṛṣṇa and
Sudarśana↑ i.e., the Sixteen Elders.↑ i.e., through the great merit of the buddha's body,
directly through enlightened mind, through inconceivable miraculous abilities, and through
knowledge conveyed in speech.