In Praise of the Hidden Valley of Kyimolung

by Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche

Ahoye! Completely pure essence, Great Akaniṣṭha in actuality —From the compassionate display
of the unimpeded natureGangri Pungyen[1] appears, Heap of Jewel-like Snow Mountains,Summit
above all others, joy of the deities and the Three Roots.If you look closely, you will notice
the detail —To the east is the emanated realm of deities;[2]To the south is the Gomasālagandha
Stūpa;[3]To the west is the Vajra Throne,[4] summit of the Noble Land of India;And
to the north are the snowy mountains of the Himalayas.[5]The mountain ridges connect to
Mount Tisé,[6]Symbolizing the meeting of the lineage of Vajradharas.The heavens have the
blue radiance of lapis lazuli,Symbolizing the unchanging wisdom of the dharmadhātu.[7]The
seven gleaming, whinnying horses[8] on the face of Mount KailāsaSymbolize the all-illuminating
mirror-like wisdom.The medicinal valley, dazzling with all kinds of blossoms,Symbolizes
the effortlessly arising all-accomplishing wisdom.The brilliant bow of Indra[9] spanning
every directionSymbolizes the boundless wisdom of equality.The galleried cliffs with their
overhanging aviariesSymbolize the unsought discriminating wisdom.The absolute and terrestrial
are indivisible here.Great bodhisattvas of the past, abiding on the bhūmis,Traversed
these lands, leaving their legacy —Blessed decrees and mudrās, inexpressible, beyond words.Ever
since then, unequivocally, the Three Protectors,[10] with Padmasambhava,Have blessed
these lands with their threefold secret of body, speech, and mind.In the caves where the
king and princes trained in liberation,Perfected their skill in realization, and basked
in experience —Those sublime beings of generation and completion,Like moving dancers, come
to mind again and again.Then, due to karma and connected aspirations,Chokgyur Lingpa arrived
in these times as Guru Rinpoche’s regent.In this sacred land of symbols, meanings, and
signs,[11]Fortunate men and women of times to comeWill take to places of one-pointed practice,Entering
into the path of ripening and liberation.For all these practitioners, samaya
holders,The power of realization will be thus perfected—the flourishing of awakened wisdom.When
at last this samsaric body is cast aside,Within the expanse of the ever-excellent
dharmakāya, emaho!

Upon the request of the king's heirs,[12]I, Urgyen, could not help but respond with chatter,Like
the strking of a sandalwood mallet on a goatskin drum,And offered these words just as
they came to mind.Maṅgalam!

Written by Karma Urgyen.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2018. (Translated by Kaleb Yaniger and Stefan Mang. Edited by
Libby Hogg and Adam Pearcey.)

Gangri Pungyen (gangs ri spungs rgyan) translates as ‘Ornamented Heap Mountain’ and refers to
Mount Manaslu. Mount Manaslu is the eighth highest mountain in the world at 8,163 meters
above sea level. Gangri Pungyen towers over the entire Nubri valley and is recognized as
a sacred mountain, and home to the local protector deity.  ↩Lhasa’s Jokhang.  ↩The Svayambhū
stūpa.  ↩Bodh Gaya, India.  ↩Mount Everest.  ↩Mount Kailash.  ↩Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche equates
the sacred landscape of Nubri with the five wisdoms (ye shes lnga), beginning with the
wisdom of the dharmadhātu (chos dbyings ye shes).  ↩An epithet of the sun used in poetry.
In ancient India the sun was often described as being drawn by seven horses.  ↩A poetic
epithet used for rainbows.  ↩The Three Protectors (mgon po gsum) are Mañjuśrī, Avalokiteśvara
and Vajrapāṇi.  ↩Symbol, meaning, and sign (brda don rtags gsum) refer to three aspects
of the vajrayāna teachings. For example, the peaceful and wrathful deities as depicted
are the symbol. The meaning that they symbolize is the enlightened qualities spontaneously
present within buddhanature. The sign is that they naturally manifest during the bardo of
dharmatā.  ↩Here Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche respectfully refers to the people of Nubri who requested
this text as the 'heirs' of King Trisong Detsen.  ↩