Prayer of Aspiration to the Stūpa “Bodily Sacrifice to the Tigress”
by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

namo  chok chu dü shyi gyalwa sé ché dang
Namo! Before all you victorious ones and your heirs throughout the whole of space and time,
tönpa nyam mé shakyé gyalpo yi
Including our own incomparable teacher, king of the Śākyas,
shyap dül chiwö gyen du chö ché né
I bow down, presenting my crown-ornament to the dust at your feet—
soldep mönpé né di drubpar dzö
May these, my prayers of aspiration, be fulfilled!

ngön tsé tubwang chang sem nying tob ché
In the past, when the Lord of Sages was the bodhisattva Mahāsattva,
gyur tsé takmo bu nga dang chépar
He offered his own body to the hungry tigress and her five cubs,
ku lü jin tang lhakmar lhé wangpö
Prompting Indra, lord of the gods, to create this stūpa,
chö dong shyengpar dzé la solwa dep
Wherein to place his remains—to you who acted in this way, I pray!

dzam bü ling gi ten chok khyepar chen
Through the blessings of prostrating, offering and praying
sönam sakpé pal shying dam pa la
Here, before such an especially sacred object in this world of ours,
chak chö solwa tabpé chinlap kyi
A supreme, venerable field for the accumulation of merit,
dak shyen drowé chang chub nyur tob shok
May I and all other beings swiftly attain awakening.

dak ni khorwar ji tsam né kyi bar
For as long as I remain here in saṃsāra,
shyen pen drup la trowa kyepa dang
May I take delight in altruistic actions,
kyo ngel mé ching zöpé gocha ten
And never tire, but remain secure in the armour of endurance,
nyal mé zö ké né su'ang juk nü shok
Capable even of entering the unbearable flames of hell.

gyelwé chö tsül tadak rab dzin ching
Maintaining all the victorious buddhas' ways of Dharma,
sangyé chang sem malü chöpa dang
And venerating each and every buddha and bodhisattva,
shing kham tadak yong su jongwa dang
May I thoroughly purify all the various realms,
dewar shekpé chö nam yong dzok shok
And fully perfect all the qualities of the sugatas.

dor na jampal yang kyi tuk kyé dang
In short, by generating the intention of Mañjughoṣa,
dzepa mönlam jishyin drup gyur né
And accomplishing his activity according to these aspirations,
namkhé ta nyam drowa malüpa
May I lead all beings, who are as infinite as space,
kuntu zangpö gopang la gö shok
To the level of Samantabhadra, the Ever Excellent!

May these words of aspiration, written by the one called Chökyi Lodrö, be accomplished in this
way!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2016.

Source: 'Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros. "stag mo lus sbyin gyi mchod sdong gi gsol smon/" in
’Jam dbyangs chos kyi blo gros kyi gsung ’bum. 12 vols. Bir: Khyentse Labrang, 2012. W1KG12986
Vol. 10: 389–390