The Guidebook to the Hidden Land of Pemokö

by Jatsön Nyingpo (1585-1656)

The Guidebook to the Hidden Land of Pemokö[1] is a revealed treasure text (gter ma), included
in the Könchok Chidü.[2] It is a prediction text (lung bstan) about the future degenerate
times and purportedly the first guidebook to the hidden land of Pemokö.

E MA HO! One such as I, the Lake-Born Padmasambhava, meandered throughout India like a river
for 3028 [years] and stayed in the region of Ü in central Tibet for 111 years. In Chāmara,[3]
the country of the rākṣasa demons, I led the red-faced [cannibals] to the Dharma. I established
all beings in happiness.

Even still, forty eons in the future, famine and poverty will arise from desire, proliferating
war will arise from hatred, different forms of pestilence will arise from delusion, and
various torments will arise from the three poisons in equal measure. At that time, sentient
beings will have no opportunities for happiness, and the Turkish armies will invade every
direction. Alas! What a surging wave of misery!

Although it might be possible to escape to the sixteen greater and lesser hidden lands, due
to the power of negative karma, very few will escape. The wealthy will be caught by the noose
of avarice, and those who have heirs will deceive one other. The elderly will lose the
will to travel, children will be unable to find the path, and animals will just up and die.
Such is the ripening of negative karma for beings without refuge!

As a sign of the ripening of such karma for beings devoid of a protection, there will also be
these outer, inner, and secret bad omens: sudden avalanches will occur on Mt. Kailash, lightning
and hail will destroy the region of Ngari, earthquakes will destroy the borderlands
of Tibet and China, heretical doctrines will multiply in Nepal, and samaya-breakers, māras,
and elemental spirits will overrun Ü and Tsang.

In the region of Dokham, destructive wildfires will burn alive tens of thousands of sentient
beings, causing [the survivors] to wander the scorched earth. There will be many mad dogs
and crazed people in the lands of Jar, Dak, and Nyal. Suffering and pestilence will blanket
Drak, Long, and Nyang. Many multifarious maladies will steam forth from the mouths of the
people of Hor and Mongolia. The majority will die as medicine will prove ineffective. Provocations
and elemental spirits from the east, wild men, predatory animals, and barbarians
from the south, poisonous commerce of warfare from the west, and Hor, Mongols, and Turks
from the north— all these will spread! Countless bolts of lightning as well as hailstones
and meteorites will descend from the vast sky. Multiple earthquakes will shake the ground.
Bright stars and white lights will appear over and over again, and the red light of the
god of fire will fill the sky.

Orchards and crops will be blighted and bear no fruit. Due to famine, generations of families
will repeatedly face ruin. Rain will fall sporadically, and there will be great depressions
and caverns in the earth. The ground will collapse, rock faces will subside, rivers will
overflow, and there will be many wildfires. When all these things occur, the signs of illness
will arise: people will be physically stunted and possess a great desire for destructive
actions. They will debauch themselves as much as possible. All of this will appear like
the rising of a storm.

At that time, various kinds of [cultural] ornamentation and weaponry will spread, there will
be a great trend of new people, new languages, and new fashion. The jewelry and attire of
the borderlands will spread into the centre of the country, while the appearance of the ordained
living in the centre of the country will disperse to the borderlands.

At that time, the appearance of both sūtra and mantra practitioners will be in disarray, new
doctrines will arise like a whirling blizzard, and unusual treatises will pervade the land.
Confidence in the Mahāyāna will fade in the face of individual fabrications of sophistry.
Demonic emanations appearing in the guise of dharmic practitioners will become ubiquitous
while individuals who attain accomplishment will be as rare as stars in broad daylight.

At that time, most beings will be under the power of Māra. Towns will be lawless like a mālā
with a broken cord. There will be no compensation for murder or maiming [a member]. Wicked
individuals will win arguments, and robbery and stealing will be rife. What spiritual friends
there are will have short lives, the meaning of meditation will go unlearned, and people
will learn to be competitive in arts and technology.[4] Some people, seeking to destroy
their delusion, will eat human flesh and solely devote themselves to the misguided conduct
of depriving beings of their lives.

At that time, an emanation of Gyalwa Chokyang[5] will be born on the north-east border and will
gain widespread fame. All who hear of him will be led to Sukhāvatī (Dewachen), by the
very same [emanation] Vajradharmadhātu.

The teachings will be confused [as the perplexed people] won’t understand the [correct] ordering
of them. Internally the people will be in disarray, and externally they will [appear]
Chinese. These will be the secret signs of their appearance. At that time, all the countryside
will be in complete turmoil! All men and women, lay and ordained, and livestock will
be distraught! Even the eight classes of gods and demons, the non-humans, will be upset.
As there will be external fighting, internally the mind will be conflicted! The channels and
winds will be muddled, as if one had drunk poison, and people will lack self-confidence.
This is definitely the magical ploys of demons. After that, there will be an emanation of
Nine Gönpo demon brothers, bearing the name Duk Lung because of whom a singular act harmful
to the whole of Tibet will arise.

For these reasons there exist the sixteen great hidden lands. Concerning the great place Pemokö:
east of Samye there is a valley called Dakpo, and if you follow the river, there is a
valley that resembles a prone scorpion. Atop the tip of the tail sits a site called Gyala,
which is the extraordinary supreme sacred site of Yama, Lord of Death. From there you can
continue to follow the river, or, alternately, going towards Kukar pass is also acceptable,
where there is the great charnel ground, Tsenmo Mebar. In the east, it is similar to a
gathering of wildlife with a base [shaped] like upward climbing scales. Behind there is a
mountain in the shape of an open flower, resembling a brandished weapon. About seven furlongs
away is a place where the gods and [ravenous] rākṣasa gather. There are many large and
small border stones, and then the four doors to the sacred site.

At Drangtsi Drak, perform a hundred feast offerings, make smoke offerings, and declare the power
of the words of truth. Then there is the so-called Ziknang Drak, which reveals the reflection
of all who gaze upon it. Then there is a great eddy in the river and a large tree
about two arm spans in width, with a fragrance like incense and a pungent flavour. You will
be able to make a bridge by felling it. There are many such big trees, so sharpen your
tools. There is a stone stūpa as big as Mt. Meru then, there is a place called Rabtröling.
All visions that are seen will appear as if they are real. There are [also] many stone crossings.

Then you will arrive at Namdak Jatsön Ling, a place which appears to be endowed with the eight
auspicious signs[6] and the eight articles.[7] The smell of incense billows everywhere
and the streams murmur with the sound of the rulu [mantra]. This is a place where meditative
concentration arises spontaneously.

Then there is a small mountain pass called Jokpama, where the path has the shape of the syllable
bhyo, the earth has an eight-petalled lotus, and there is an eight-spoked wheel in the
sky. The surroundings feature the eight auspicious symbols and the eight auspicious articles.

To the east of the place called Gumik Lingtsé is Namdak Köpa as well as Melong Köchung, to the
south is Palden Köpa as well as Yönten Köchung, to the west is Pemo Köpa as well as Pemo
Köchung, to the north is Lerab Köpa as well as Drakpo Köchung, and in the centre is Tayé
Köpa. The area of the Five Köchen is one hundred and eighty furlongs, and the Four Köchung
extend for thirty-five furlongs. The perimeter is surrounded by snow and rock, and a rain
of flowers falls continuously from the sky. When the seasons change, if one flees the four
places—China, Jang, Lo, and Kong—then one will be satisfied by escaping to the place [of
Pemokö]. Each and every area is sealed by mountain passes, rivers, and cliffs. There will
be no risk of conflict or strife,

At that time, the emanation of the Guru will gradually show the path. Remember [me] Orgyen at
all times and recite the Guru Pema Siddhi [Hūṃ mantra]. This will clear away obstacles and
adversity. I will appear vividly to those who have undoubting faith in me and longingly
keep me in the centre of their hearts. Continuously sing heartfelt supplications and I will
also come as sundry sounds. Visualise [me] either above the crown of your head or in front
of you, and you will be able to perceive me directly. Let everyone during the five hundred
[degenerate] years humbly beseech me, Padmākara, and take refuge in me. Compared to other
Buddhas, my compassion is swift. Even if we do not meet in this life, I will certainly
dispel suffering in the intermediate state. For me, there is nothing more than the welfare
of beings. Whatever one wishes will be spontaneously accomplished.

Amongst the sixteen hidden lands, whoever hears of or recalls this great Pemokö, their karmic
obscurations will be purified. Even walking or riding seven steps in its direction will
certainly result in being born there. Performing seven full prostrations while visualising
this [place] will lead to becoming a Non-Returner and no longer wandering in cyclic existence.
Whoever surely arrives here will obtain the indestructible rainbow body.

Even drinking a single drop of water or eating a pinch of herb will pacify sufferings such as
chronic illness and clear dulled sense faculties. The elderly too will take on youthful
forms. Those with bad karma, who do not recall the excellent dharma, will, by virtue of travelling
to this sacred site, become self-liberated accomplished ones.

Consuming the earth and stones of this place, even at the end of one’s [karmic] lifespan, will
extend life by hundreds and thousands of years. If feeling cold, wear the union of fire
and wind as clothing. If thirsty, enjoy ambrosial water. If hungry or destitute, live on
corn, the five kinds of cereal, and the fruits from trees. There is no physical pain or mental
suffering, and there is no need for conflict or sloth. The primordial wisdom of the [union
of] emptiness, luminosity, and the self-blazing warmth of bliss will arise. The majority
of fruit is about the size of a horse’s head, unhusked wheat and barley grains the size
of an apricot stone, and radishes and turnips [so large] people can barely lift them. There
is no need to grind salt as the food is comparable to nectar and equal in potency to
the sustenance of the gods.

The channel of clear intelligence will open, clairvoyance and the four immeasurables like love
and compassion will arise, and in six months a body of light will be spontaneously accomplished.


How amazing! How amazing that the victorious ones of the three times have such powerful prayers
of aspiration and such capacity! One such as I, the Lake-Born Padmākara, concealed many
texts as treasures in mountains and valleys. I concealed many sacred substances, representations
of body, speech, and mind. I hid a mixture of many excellent teachings for protecting,
repelling, and killing. In the future may those treasures be taken out by a [heart]
son. There will be many obstacles when Jatsön, the emanation of [Myang] Tingdzin Zangpo,[8]
fulfils his own and others’ aims.

At that time an emanation light ray of Takra Lugong[9] will appear disguised as a [heart] son,
and there is a risk that he will cause obstacles. Practice firm samādhi which blazes forth
with the powers of subjugation and wrathful activity. An emanation of the evil minister
Tramik will appear in the guise of a spiritual friend and through his cunning disparage
others and eventually cause disputes. At such a time, entreat the Lord of Great Compassion
(Avalokiteśvara). There will be an emanation of the demoness Zanglak, who will adopt a beautifully
fine form and cause obstacles to your practice, vows, and samaya. Look at her with
intelligence as she could be seen as a demoness or a goddess. An emanation of Tsenmar Raru
will appear in the guise of a noble man pretending to be your patron and eventually take
hold of your life. It is crucial that you dedicate yourself to the ablution of Ucchuṣma,
king of the wrathful (Trogyal Metsek). You will come across about seven manifestations of
red-faced Te’u Rang dwarves, who will provide bad, unclean food and disparage you. Develop
compassion towards them and transform them through that relationship.

Furthermore, at that time since the three poisons will be expressed so strongly, gradually spread
and cherish the profound treasures. Simultaneously, as a result of propagating empowerments
and oral transmissions, there will be many samaya transgressors and you must absolutely
look after them at all times as well as strive in your own practice. Do not drink maddening
alcohol and avoid low caste women. Travel the path of secret mantra and be diligent.
Whatever happiness or suffering befalls you, recall [Guru] Orgyen, and all those with whom
you come into contact, however significant or insignificant, will be satisfied.

Even amongst manifestations, this heart son[10] is the foremost emanation. For example: among
all the different kinds of blood, he is that of the very heart. Among celestial bodies in
the sky, he is the essential sun and moon. Among the best medicines, he is the special,
all-conquering one. Among jewels, he is that which fulfills all wishes and desires. Among
treasure revealers, he is the discoverer of the most supreme and rarest treasure. Fortunate
ones, supplicate him. In this vidyādhara’s heart centre, light energy blazes in the branch
channels to form a triangle, the auspiciousness of which is externally apparent. The ferocity
of his exalted mind is akin to the games of children— one moment divine, the next demonic.
[However] his conduct is faithful to the Three Baskets [of the Buddhist teachings].
As for his meditation, he practices Mahāmudrā, Dzogchen, and Madhyamaka, and his view arises
as the non-referential view, free from the extremes [of nihilism and eternalism]. He
immediately remembers that he has no time for distractions. Suffering unbearably, eyes wet
with tears, unfriendly yet maintaining samaya—all of this is the magical display of his channels.
A person possessing such karma is one in a hundred. This heart son of Padma will
be surrounded by plenty of fortunate ones with the right karma. However, since there are many
with bad karma and forsaken samaya, ḍākinīs who are the essence of the sky, protect him!
Samaya.

The seal of the words of the Buddha, the seal of the nectar of the excellent dharma, the seal
of the aspirational prayers of the saṃgha. Seal! Seal! Sea! The seal of the compassion of
the gurus, the seal of the blessings of the deities, the seal of the entrustment of the
ḍākinīs, the seal of the power and force of the dharma protectors.

Seal! Seal! Seal!

Concerning both the concise and extensive guidebooks of Pemokö, which is one of the sixteen
hidden lands, the treasure revealer Jatsön Nyingpo brought forth [this guide] from the Guru
Rinpoche Practice Cave in the valley of Kongpo.

| Translated by Tom Greensmith, Ryan Jacobson and Tenzin Choephel, 2020.